Data mining
Fortunately, the kind of learning techniques explained in this book do not
present these conceptual problems—they are called machine learning without
really presupposing any particular philosophic stance about what learning actually
is. Data mining is a practical topic and involves learning in a practical, not
a theoretical, sense. We are interested in techniques for finding and describing
structural patterns in data as a tool for helping to explain that data and make
predictions from it. The data will take the form of a set of examples—examples
of customers who have switched loyalties, for instance, or situations in which
certain kinds of contact lenses can be prescribed. The output takes the form of
predictions about new examples—a prediction of whether a particular customer
will switch or a prediction of what kind of lens will be prescribed under given
circumstances. But because this book is about finding and describing patterns
in data, the output may also include an actual description of a structure that
can be used to classify unknown examples to explain the decision. As well as
performance, it is helpful to supply an explicit representation of the knowledge
that is acquired. In essence, this reflects both definitions of learning considered
previously: the acquisition of knowledge and the ability to use it.
Many learning techniques look for structural descriptions of what is learned,
descriptions that can become fairly complex and are typically expressed as sets
of rules such as the ones described previously or the decision trees described
later in this chapter. Because they can be understood by people, these descriptions
serve to explain what has been learned and explain the basis for new predictions.
Experience shows that in many applications of machine learning to
data mining, the explicit knowledge structures that are acquired, the structural
descriptions, are at least as important, and often very much more important,
than the ability to perform well on new examples. People frequently use data
mining to gain knowledge, not just predictions. Gaining knowledge from data
certainly sounds like a good idea if you can do it. To find out how, read on!