INFORMATION EXTRACTION
The following group of articles explores information extraction,
mostly named entity extraction, largely using machine learning
techniques rather than hand-built rules, with a varying amount of
linguistic information being used.
Mooney and Bunescu do a wonderful job summarizing various
contributions machine learning has made in advancing the
information extraction task. They examine a number of
information extraction algorithms, both as methods for extracting
useful knowledge in and of themselves and as precursors to (or
integrated parts of) various data mining algorithms. Although
they look at a great variety of algorithms and applications, the
most linguistic knowledge any of them use is POS tagging.
Gliozzo et al. provide a discussion on how to use Instance
Filtering to reduce the size of the training set for supervised
classification-based learning systems for entity recognition. Their
work shows that not only can this improve the computation time
for both training and classification, but, by reducing the skewness
in the data, accuracy can improve as well. They also use POS,
but no other linguistic concepts.
Fu et al. explore the usefulness of two extensions to current
Hidden Markov Models for entity extraction in Chinese:
including using the preceding literals as well as tags to predict
entities (lexicalization) and grouping characters into known words
as input to entity extraction. Grouping characters into words is a
long standing problem in any text analysis task in Chinese (as
well as in Japanese and Korean) and could be considered an NLP
technique akin to phrasal grouping in languages like English.
However, their experiments show that, while lexicalization helps
with entity extraction in Chinese, incorporating known word
information does not.
While the focus of Li et al. is on a new distributed form of
association rule mining, they use the results of their entity
extraction algorithm which is discussed briefly. It is another
example of a machine learning algorithm for finding entities in
text and, like some of those above, uses POS tagging and no other